Draft GSoC announcement blog post - take 2 (#359)
MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io: _posts/2024-02-23-gsoc2024.md

---
layout: post
title: Google Summer of Code 2024
---

<p>
<img
src="https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/resources/downloads/GSoC-Vertical.svg"
title="Google Summer of Code 2024" alt="Google Summer of Code with
MDAnalysis 2024"
style="float: right; height: 10em; " />
</p>

MDAnalysis has been accepted as an [organization][org] for [Google Summer of
Code 2024][gsoc]! If you are interested in working with us this summer and you
are new to open source, please read the advice and links below and write to us
on the [GSoC with MDAnalysis discussion forum][discussion forum].

We are looking forward to all applications from *any new and beginner

> open source contributors over 18 years old* or *students*. Projects

Reviewer: Students also need to be 18 or over. Worth linking to the [eligibility criteria](https://buildyourfuture.withgoogle.com/programs/summer-of-code)?

Author: Done.

| 5       | [Better interfacing of Blender and MDAnalysis]({{ site.github.wiki }}/GSoC-2024-Project-Ideas#project-5-better-interfacing-of-blender-and-mdanalysis)                                         | medium     | 350 hours   | Add functionality to visualize simple MDAnalysis results in Blender                                                                  | Python, basic knowledge of MDAnalysis, familiarity with Blender ideal                  | @BradyAJohnston, @yuxuanzhuang |

## Information for prospective GSoC Contributors

You must meet our [own requirements] if you want to be a GSoC
Contributor with MDAnalysis this year (read all the docs behind these
links!) and read the points below for the application process. You must also meet the [eligibility criteria]. Our [GSoC
FAQ][] collects common questions from applicants.

In short:
Agree to be bound by our [Code of Conduct];
Familiarize yourself with MDAnalysis;
Submit a short pre-proposal — 

> **If you have been invited to proceed with your application (based on your pre-prosal)** have a pull request merged in MDAnalysis.

Reviewer: Make bullet points?

Author: Added numbered lists - the formatting must not have worked correctly when I initially copied this over from the google doc.

### Code of Conduct

The MDAnalysis community values diversity and is committed to providing a
productive, harassment-free environment to every member. Our [Code of Conduct]
explains the values that we as a community uphold. *Every member (and every
GSoC Contributor) agrees to follow the [Code of Conduct]*.

### Familiarize yourself with MDAnalysis

As a start to get familiar with MDAnalysis and open source development you
should follow these steps:
Watch the MDAnalysis Trailer

> Complete the Quick Start Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Watch the MDAnalysis Trailer
Complete the Quick Start Guide
```
Bullet points and links to the trailer and quick start guide?

#### Watch the MDAnalysis Trailer

The [MDAnalysis Trailer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uMAfvwFkD3o) on YouTube
is a one minute introduction to MDAnalysis.

<div class="js-video">
	<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/uMAfvwFkD3o" frameborder="0"
	allowfullscreen class="video"></iframe>
</div>

> There are also additional [introductory videos](https://www.mdanalysis.org/pages/learning_MDAnalysis/#introductory) available to give you an idea of what problems MDAnalysis is solving.

Reviewer 2: Smarter linking
```suggestion
There are also additional [introductory videos]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/learning_MDAnalysis/#introductory) available to give you an idea of what problems MDAnalysis is solving.
```

#### Complete the Quick Start Guide

Start by [installing] the MDAnalysis package. We have a [Quick Start Guide] explaining the basics of MDAnalysis. You
should go through it at least once to understand how MDAnalysis is
used. Continue reading the [User Guide] to learn more.

### Submit a pre-proposal

> We ask you to submit a short *pre-proposal* so that we can evaluate if you are a good fit for work on MDAnalysis. In this pre-proposal you tell us what project you’d like to work on, what you consider the major challenges, and how you plan to solve the problem. MDAnalysis developers will review your proposal and then either invite you to continue with your application and work on an issue to get involved in the code development or tell you that we will not consider your application. A rejection is not a judgment on you or your abilities but an assessment of how well you fit the specific requirements of MDAnalysis as a scientific software package — we much rather you spend your energies on contributing to another exciting GSoC project than being rejected later by MDAnalysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We ask you to submit a short *pre-proposal* so that we can evaluate your understanding of the proposed project. In this pre-proposal you tell us what project you’d like to work on, what you consider the major challenges, and how you plan to solve the problem. MDAnalysis developers will review your proposal and then either invite you to continue with your application and work on an issue to get involved in the code development or tell you that we will not consider your application. A rejection is not a judgment on you or your abilities but an assessment of how well you fit the specific requirements of MDAnalysis as a scientific software package — we much rather you spend your energies on contributing to another exciting GSoC project than being rejected later by MDAnalysis.
```
Maybe also worth adding that participants only have one shot at this, if that's the case?

Reviewer 2: Good idea, this avoids lengthy and frustrating back-and-forth discussions.

Author: Added the following: *Please note that this decision is final, and applicants should only submit **one** pre-proposal.*

**We require GSoC applicants to submit a pre-proposal** that will determine who is then invited to attempt a pull request (see below). If you are invited to attempt a pull request and ultimately submit a full application, the pre-proposal will help you gather some of the information you will need to include. 

Submit your pre-proposal via [this submission form](https://forms.gle/wbKZDWmzAk1GVMgR6) **as soon as possible, but no later than March 15, 2024**. You should prepare the following information for your pre-proposal:

> * Email Address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Email address
```

> Submit your pre-proposal via [this submission form](https://forms.gle/wbKZDWmzAk1GVMgR6) **as soon as possible, but no later than March 15, 2024**. You should prepare the following information for your pre-proposal:

Reviewer 2: @jennaswa add a checkbox to the form indicating that they read the CoC and accept it?

Author: Done.

> * GitHub Handle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* GitHub handle
```

> * Real Name (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Real name (optional)
```
Why optional?

Reviewer 2: I had written "optional" originally because I don't think that GSOC requires clear names... I might be wrong. In any case, it's not clear to me that we do need real names and then I think it's fine to leave it up to applicant.

> * Basic Information on Your Background (e.g., Education, Relevant Experience with MDAnalysis and Molecular Dynamics or Computational Physics/Chemistry/Materials)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Basic information on your background (e.g., education, relevant experience with MDAnalysis and molecular dynamics or computational Physics/Chemistry/Materials)
```
Is there a reason why everything is capitalised here? I might be missing something...

Author: No reason - will change these throughout

> Submit your pre-proposal via [this submission form](https://forms.gle/wbKZDWmzAk1GVMgR6) **as soon as possible, but no later than March 15, 2024**. You should prepare the following information for your pre-proposal:

Reviewer 2: I'd make the proposal form link a named link
```markdown
[this submission form][submission form]

...

[submission form]: https://forms.gle/wbKZDWmzAk1GVMgR6
```
so that the link only exists in one place and we can more easily re-use it next year...

* Project Title
* Project Size (90h, 175h, 350h)
* **Problem:** Describe the problem to be solved. What is the background? What is the overarching question? You can also comment on why this is an interesting or difficult problem. Clearly define the overall goal of what you want to find out.
* **Approach:** Describe how you are going to reach your goal (i.e., answer the overarching question). Which algorithms are you going to use? Are there any libraries or other packages you want to use? Do you need to research different solutions? Be as concrete as possible; you want to convince your audience that it is feasible to solve this problem and you have an idea how to tackle it.
* **Objectives:** Use a numbered list to state 3–5 measurable non-trivial outcomes that you need to achieve in order to reach the overall goal. These are the milestones that you have to reach; they are possibly dependent on each other. For each objective it must be clear how to decide if you fulfilled it or not. Objectives are formulated in terms of actions and deliverables.

> ### Merge a pull request (*if you are invited to based on your pre-proposal*)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Have a pull request merged (*if you are invited to based on your pre-proposal*)
```

You must have *at least one commit in the development branch of MDAnalysis* in
order to be eligible. Note that the earlier you submit your pre-proposal (which are reviewed on a rolling basis), the more time you may have to work on having code merged!   

We have a list of [easy bugs][] and
suggested [GSOC Starter issues][GSOC Starter] to work on in our issue tracker
on GitHub. *We only accept one [GSOC Starter issue][GSOC Starter] per
applicant* so that all contributors invited to attempt pull requests get a chance. If you want to dive deeper, we
encourage you to tackle some of the other issues in our issue tracker. We also appreciate contributions which add more tests or update/improve our documentation.

To start developing for MDAnalysis have a look at our guide on
[contributing to MDAnalysis][dev-guide] and write to us on the [GSoC with MDAnalysis discussion forum][discussion forum] if you have more questions
about setting up a development environment or how to contribute.

## Final remarks

> **Submit your pre-proposal before March 15, 2024**, but the earlier the better! We will then let you know if you have been selected to attempt an issue on GitHub and ultimately submit a full application. The GSoC contributor application period opens on March 18, 2024.

Reviewer: How are we letting them know? Worth specifying IMO.

Reviewer 2: via email submitted in the form?

Reviewer 2: Should we specify how long it will take to review a pre-proposal? 3 days, 1 week?

Otherwise you get inquiries "have you reviewed my preproposal yet"? 

Better to set expectations early.

Author: I've said a week for now - does that seem reasonable @MDAnalysis/gsoc-mentors ?

One option is to pick a day of the week, say Monday (so people have week and weekend days to review, depending on their preference), to send pre-proposal decisions every week. If @MDAnalysis/gsoc-mentors could commit to helping with reviewing on this schedule, I can be in charge of sending weekly decision notifications.

Reviewer 3: One week and Mondays would work for me 👍

Reviewer 4: Agree with @cbouy - one week and Mondays sound reasonable.

> **Submit your pre-proposal before March 15, 2024**, but the earlier the better! We will then let you know via the email you provide in the [pre-proposal submission form](https://forms.gle/wbKZDWmzAk1GVMgR6) if you have been selected to attempt an issue on GitHub and ultimately submit a full application; we strive to inform you of a decision within a week of your submission. The GSoC contributor application period opens on March 18, 2024.

Reviewer 2: use named link for submission form
